# T4 lysozyme L99A and L99A/M102Q ligands binding free energies

## Manifest

- `input/`: input files for ligands and pdb generated by `../scripts/prepare_input_files.py`.
- `t4lysozyme.yaml`: YANK YAML script to setup and run the free energy calculations.
- `t4ligands.json`: JSON file containing SMILES and ITC binding free energies for the ligands. For each ligand, the
file has name, SMILES, binding free energy and error (`null` if no error was available), assay temperature (in Kelvin),
buffer pH and salt concentration (in `M`), and reference to the paper with the original description of the assay.

## To do
- I have to determine exactly where does the measurement for L99A/M102Q-catechol comes from. I have opened issue #63 in
the benchmarksets repo to discuss this.

## Notes
- The most populated protonation state at pH <= 6.8 seems pretty trivial, but I run Epik anyway, and the most likely
states turned out to be the same as those in the `input/ligands-*.mol2` files.
- We decided to use ff14SB as it is the recommended protein force field on the amber manual as of Dec 1st 2017.
- We decided to run only a few calculations with a FlatBottom restraint ecompassing the entire protein to check that
free energies are not affected to much by the choice of the restraint. All calculations are run with the Harmonic
restraint, which should speed up convergence. I chose butylbenzene and p-xylene for the flat-bottom simulations as they
span pretty much the whole dynamic range for this set, and they are well characterized in the literature.

### About ionic strengths
I'm using Cl- to simulate acetate and phosphate anions. All the ionic strengths were determined based on the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation and activity coefficient were computed iteratively based on the Davies model. The
thermodynamic pKa of the acids was assumed to be the following:
- acetic acid: 4.76
- dihydrogen phosphate: 6.82

The buffer compositions were assumed to be the following:
- 50mM sodium acetate at pH 5.5 [1]: 6.55mM HOAc and 43.44mM NaOAc, the ionic strength is 43.44mM.
- 500mM NaCl, 100mM sodium phosphate at pH 6.8 [2] and [4]: 29.57mM NaH2PO4 and 70.43mM Na2HPO4, the ionic strength is 740.85mM.
- 50mM sodium acetate (H0.14Na0.86OAc) at pH 5.45 [5]: 7.11mM HOAc and 42.89mM NaOAc, the ionic strength is 42.89mM.
- 200mM KCl, 50mM potassium phosphate at pH 6.8 [3]: 13.81mM KH2PO4 and 36.18mM K2HPO4, the ionic strength is 322.37mM.

The Davies model becomes less accurate when the ionic strength is greater than 0.5M, so I've used the
[biomol calculator](http://www.biomol.net/en/tools/buffercalculator.htm) to verify the final result.


## References

[1] Morton, A., Baase, W. A., & Matthews, B. W. (1995). Energetic origins of specificity of ligand binding in an
interior nonpolar cavity of T4 lysozyme. Biochemistry, 34(27), 8564-8575 [DOI: [10.1021/bi00027a006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/bi00027a006)].

[2] Wei, B. Q., Baase, W. A., Weaver, L. H., Matthews, B. W., & Shoichet, B. K. (2002). A model binding site for
testing scoring functions in molecular docking. Journal of molecular biology, 322(2), 339-355 [DOI: [10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00777-5](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00777-5)].

[3] Boyce, S. E., Mobley, D. L., Rocklin, G. J., Graves, A. P., Dill, K. A., & Shoichet, B. K. (2009). Predicting
ligand binding affinity with alchemical free energy methods in a polar model binding site. Journal of molecular
biology, 394(4), 747-763 [DOI: [10.1016/j.jmb.2009.09.049](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2009.09.049)].

[4] Mobley, D. L., Graves, A. P., Chodera, J. D., McReynolds, A. C., Shoichet, B. K., & Dill, K. A. (2007). Predicting
absolute ligand binding free energies to a simple model site. Journal of molecular biology, 371(4), 1118-1134
[DOI: [10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.002](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.002)].

[5] Liu, L., Baase, W. A., & Matthews, B. W. (2009). Halogenated Benzenes Bound within a Non-polar Cavity in T4
Lysozyme Provide Examples of I⋯ S and I⋯ Se Halogen-bonding. Journal of molecular biology, 385(2), 595-605
[DOI: [10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.086](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.086)].
